And joining us now on the debate in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Deborah Davis.
She's founder of the Environmental
Health Trust and the author of The
Secret History of the War on Cancer. And
back here in studio, Robert Buckman,
medical oncologist with Princess
Margaret Hospital. Allison Simington,
vice president of outreach with the
Ontario Genomics Institute. And joining
us once again, Sid Arthur Mukerjee,
author of The Emperor of All Maladies, a
biography of cancer. Want to thank you
two for joining us here in the studio.
Deborah Davis, it's great to have you on
the program once again from uh
Pennsylvania. And let's start with you,
Deborah Davis. Richard Nixon's War on
Cancer launched 40 years ago this year.
So far, in your view, success or
failure?
It's been a success in some small areas,
but it's been a failure because it has
not addressed the known causes of cancer
that were known when the president
launched the war 40 years ago. For
example, tobacco, asbestous, vinyl
chloride, synthetic hormones were known
40 years ago to cause cancer. And yet,
the war focused solely on finding and
treating the disease. And in that
regard, we've had some spectacular
successes. We have dramatically improved
our ability to find and treat breast
colon cancer, for example. But we have
not done a good enough job on the
environment, and we know that because of
the toll that we're seeing from lung
cancer related deaths even now. Allison
Simington, success or failure? 40 years
later. Oh, I think it's a success. Um,
except if you believe the word we were
going to beat cancer. So, I think it's
the hope versus the hype. It's the same
problem you have with the human genome
project. We promise too much. What we
found, the success has been that it's
not cancer a disease. It's a myriad of
diseases. Um, what we're starting to
understand, we know some of what those
environmental things were. That's
absolutely true. How do they influence
the genetic makeup? We're not, we're
still sorting all of that out. And so
while we can say for sure some of those
things cause cancer and need to be dealt
with, how we're going to how you can
separate out different cancers for
different patients, that war that
started all of that research or continue
a lot of that research. So I'm not one
to throw the baby out with the bath
water to say we didn't win win on one
disease because it's not one disease,
but we need to do big science if we need
to understand these diseases. Rob
Buckman, I I agree with all of the above
quite seriously. Th this is the big
point. There is not a single disease
called cancer. Just the same there isn't
a single disease called infection. I
mean if you get a cold it's an
infection. If you get Ebola virus it's
an infection. But there isn't one single
disease called infections. And actually
lumping them all together as cancer is
actually bad. So I would say the 1971
war on cancer was a real problematic
thing to declare war on. It's like
declaring war on death.
success or failure. Well, you know, you
know, it is a real a real problem in
because it united the all of the cancers
which are just as Allison said are at
least 300 different diseases depending
on how you slice up even cancer the
breast for example. Okay, that having
been said, you want to say more
successful or less successful 40 years
later? Let's put it that way. Well, I
think the successes are slowly coming. I
agree with the all of the above. I said
as as Robert was saying um it's
absolutely true that there were known
carcinogens. There are absolutely known
carcinogens that we haven't done enough
about. Tobacco tobacco tobacco being
being a big major one of them. Um we
also haven't achieved the kind of
promise that was promised up front. Um
one note that I personally want to make
is that it's absolutely true that
there's not one illness, there's not one
disease. It has many many myriad forms.
But I also want to sound a cautionary
note against over dramatizing the
diversity because there are connections
cancer there are deep connections and if
you forget what those connections are
you fall into a kind of hole
particularly around advocacy. So there's
a there there's becoming a kind of
theory now that you know since breast
cancer and prostate cancer are so
fundamentally different diseases, we
should put different pots of money into
breast cancer research and prostate
cancer research and every $1 that goes
away from lung cancer goes into you know
leukemia. That's not true. In fact many
many of the seinal advances in
treatment, prevention and cure of
various cancers have come from
completely heterologous cancers. um you
know leukemia becomes a very close
relative to a v variant of
gastrointestinal cancer. So don't I
think you know if if we overemphasize
the diversity you also begin to kind of
create a nihilism around the fact that
there's important connections and we
learn through those connections. Deborah
Davis do you agree with that about those
connections? Absolutely. And I also want
to say though your first question Steve
there was an incredible political
environment out of which this war on
cancer emerged. Think about it. The
United States was in the midst of losing
a huge war in Southeast Asia. The
president mounted two wars at the same
time. One was the war on cancer. The
other was the war on drugs. The metaphor
of war. One can quarrel with applying it
in that situation because in both those
cases, whether it's drugs and cancer,
we're dealing with a very complex
phenomenon. And I think that it was very
misleading, although perhaps politically
popular. There was a section that didn't
make it into my book about how Edward
Kennedy and Richard Nixon were fighting
over which one of them hated cancer the
more, right? Because they both wanted to
show how much they hated cancer and this
was going to unite people. And of
course, we all hate cancer. But that's
besides the point. Mounting a war on
this disease, I think, led to a number
of misconceptions about it. And yet,
while we've made progress, we're how
what do you call it? A war after 40
years. Well, let me pick up on this.
Pretty tired after 40 years. I hear you.
Let me pick up on this angle then. Part
of the war is just bucketfuls of money
towards research. Do we spend too much
of our potential healthc care research
dollars on cancer research? Well, that's
a tough question, isn't it? Well, that's
what we do here, Alison. It's a very
tough question. And so and on and
especially in Ontario because Ontario
spends huge buckets of money on research
in this field as as does actually Canada
um both with the Ontario Institute of
Cancer Research PH we were talking about
before Prince Hospital at Princess
Margaret Hospital. So do we spend too
much? Well,
okay. So I'm in a difficult question. I
don't like the question because if I had
more money to spend everywhere, I'd
spend it everywhere. It's very very
intelligent direction. That's the
important thing. What the one thing that
really is a clear waste of money is me
too. You know, simply doing the same
thing. And I me too just following the
same thing. Somebody I mean a few years
ago somebody said, "Oh, they've done um
um um a test with um uh this particular
cancer drug sis platinum at 50
milligrams per meter squared. um they
know that 200 milligrams per meter
squared um is excessive um and but and
they here's a study where they said 75
they haven't done 65 let's do 65 and I
said no that's really that would be a
waste of money merely sort of as a
mindlessly metoing hoping that you're
going to get the answer like like mop
did for Hodkins disease unfortunately is
not an intelligent way it may be that we
need more direction of the money not
simply more money. Let me I think we're
not spending enough money. I mean, just
uh just to give you a couple of
examples, just to put the money in
perspective, the National Cancer
Institute budget of the United States uh
is about $5 billion a year. Uh the
United States spent anywhere between 1
to3 trillion dollar on the recent war in
the Gulf. That is anywhere between 200th
or or 200 times to 600 times the budget
of the National Cancer Institute for a
year. Right? The number of deaths from
cancer in the United States this year is
going to be 600,000 odd deaths. The
number of young debts, anyone anywhere
between under under the age of 60 is
going to number in hundreds of
thousands. So this the scope of the
problem there's a disproportionality of
the money being spent. But I agree
completely that there's that the money
has to be every money has to be spent
strategically. So so to answer back to
that question because my uh wasn't very
good. um in comparison for that
absolutely agree it's an overall
unspending on science in general that is
a huge problem so if you ask me do we
spend enough on environmental science
versus cancer science I can't answer
that question because you need to spend
more on all of it I bet Deborah could
answer that question environmental
science go ahead well no what I'd like
to say is is that a sid is absolutely
correct we do not have a large civil
conversation about the priorities and
the way we're spending money on things
whether it's war investing in
infrastructure or my own favorite right
now we have lost a whole generation in
science and training and engineering we
are people are not going into science
and engineering now because there are no
jobs and there's no training programs
and we are going to pay the consequences
of that and lose our ability to compete
in the world because of that tremendous
failure to fund the basic training in
science and engineering it's a
tremendous problem for all of us having
said that I think that we would probably
all agree that we need to target what
the money goes for in cancer. And just
as Dr. Buckman said, this me tooism,
which there's been a ton of, is really
there's the only way that's going to be
addressed, is through creating uh groups
of wise people who will come up with
advice. And right now, as you know, it's
sort of the the drug of the week or the
the fat of the week. Scientists are
social. You know, we don't like to admit
it, but we are social. We follow fads
and fashions and that's part of the
dilemma that we we face here as well.
Let me pick up on something that you and
I talked about, Sid, in our conversation
earlier and I'll go to Rob on this one.
There was not that long ago a time when
you couldn't say breast cancer in the
New York Times. Yes, I heard that. Yes.
The language of talking about cancer has
changed. We are no longer dying from
cancer. We are living with cancer.
Absolutely. Is that an important
distinction to make? Well, yes, it is.
um in in Canada um literally it's
somewhere between 50 and 55% of people
who are diagnosed with a new cancer this
year will not die of that cancer um and
it's very important point somebody once
said that they'll die at their appointed
time of nothing serious which I actually
I like that I like that view um very
very important point if it said you 45%
of cancers they will not affect you and
they will not shorten your life that's a
very very important thing indeed I think
we are actually at the stage of thinking
about the cancers as some of them as
chronic diseases chronic diseases in
like blood pressure. I mean I I've say
this many many times but you know if a
woman goes to a hospital and says you
know I had chest pain and they find a
breast lump I mean she might say oh well
you know you know I was sure I had a
heart disease but that breast thank
goodness wasn't cancer actually it's
completely the wrong way round if that
breast lump was cancer and it was a
small you under two centimeters lymph
negative it's the end of the switch it's
never going to bother her at all the
heart disease is going to be a serious
problem one day a woman will say oh sure
I just had a little touch of breath
cancer there. But thank goodness the
chest pain was reflux, not heart
disease. And that's that's the what
we're aiming for. I'm sorry. S when you
write your next book, could you call it
the emperors of some of the maladies,
you know, the biographies of a few of
the cancers. Let me just remain cancer.
Let's clarify this because I mentioned
to you that one of the, you know, people
who wrote book reviews sometime were not
happy with your use of, you know, the
singular biography. He was one of them.
I was I was guilty as charged. I'm
sorry. The book is fabulous and it'll
change it will change the minds and the
attitudes of everybody who reads it. But
I I I wrote a book. This is not advert
but the title was cancer is a word not a
sentence. And the point is cancer is a
word and you can't have a biography of a
word and it just doesn't matter. It
doesn't m it's a great book. Thank you.
It won the Pulitzer. It did. Okay. I can
stand up. Moving right along. Moving
right along. Um S I'll get you to
comment on this part here. I want to
read a little excerpt actually not from
your book but from a piece in the New
Yorker from last year. Uh research of
course increasingly allowing us to
understand risks for various cancers.
You get screened for genetic markers for
specific cancers. You can make decisions
based on your knowledge of that. Here's
what they said in New Yorker about that.
A world in which cancer is normalized as
a manageable chronic condition would be
a wonderful thing. But a risk factor
world in which we all think of ourselves
as precancerous would not. It might
decrease the incidence of some forms of
malignancy while hugely increasing the
numbers of healthy people under medical
treatment. It would be a strange victory
in which the price to be paid for
checking the spread of cancer through
the body is its uncontrolled spread
through the culture. Agree? I don't
agree because I think it's somewhat of a
false dichotomy. Um because I think one
of the tasks that's facing us in cancer
biology now is to precisely discriminate
the the kind of cancer that will kill
you from the kind of cancer that won't
kill you. So in other words, the PSA
test is a thing of the past. We
shouldn't be really relying for prostate
cancer for prostate cancer, right? which
now the problem with the PSA test as you
know very well is it is it picks up a
whole bunch of people and some of them
will have the the malignant nasty
variety of prostate cancer and some of
them will have not the malignant not the
nasty var prostate cancer but both will
be lumped as men who have prostate
cancer now that's obviously a false
lumping because the two behaviors are
completely different but what do you say
don't get checked no I would say invent
a more sophisticated test and he he's
he's right a lot of prostatologists
would actually say don't have a PSA
exactly that reason that it would
identify a cancer but it would can't
cannot identify the kind of cancer that
might kill you from the kind of cancer
that will not. So it's a very very
important point. Deborah, you want to
weigh in on that as well? With breast
cancer, yes, with breast cancer as well
as with prostate specific antigen, the
PSA, we've got to become more
sophisticated at what we're looking for.
There may be markers of hormone
metabolites ratios. For example, for
breast cancer, there's never been
adequate study of the importance or not
of the ratio of 16 alpha to two
hydroxyestone. These are two types of
estrogen metabolites which show some
promise in post-menopausal women being
useful for predicting breast cancer risk
and even predicting the value of
different Deborah. I'm going to jump in
for one second there because you you
spoke something that wasn't English a
second ago and we don't like that on
this program. Now, tell me what you
meant by all that. I'm sorry. Let me try
it again. For breast cancer, there are
ways of looking at blood tests that
might be able to predict who's going to
get breast cancer and who's not. And the
prostate specific antigen or PSA tests
we've just been discussing had looked
like it was going to have a lot of value
and it turns out that it falsely
predicts things so that you can have a
high PSA and have an infection and not
have cancer at all. And you need to know
the difference and really there's a lot
of unnecessary surgery and unnecessary
treatment that's going on because we've
been relying on this PSA test. So, we
need better tests. It doesn't mean that
we shouldn't do none, but we should stop
relying on tests that don't work very
well. Is that a concern here that we're
unnecessarily removing many men's
prostates because of this test? That is
not what it ought to be. So, I'm I'm not
a a cancer doctor. So, but I would say
probably that's true because it's
certainly true when you talk about the
one-size drug fits all. So, we So, if
even if it's not cancer and we're just
talking about drug therapy, you've
talked about cholesterol and statins and
things like that. the drugs that lower
cholesterol. Lots of people don't react
to those drugs, but we give them anyway
because their cholesterol is high. And
so it's the same situation here. And
what you really need to do is separate
out your group of patients. What we call
we call it stratify. So stratify the
patients. So we know this group of
patients should get the therapy. This
group of patients shouldn't get the
therapy. Maybe this group patients
should get the therapy, but we
understand that their adverse events
will be worse and they need to be
informed. Is our knowledge sophisticated
enough to be able to make those
determinations and distinctions right
now? I I would say no and probably not
for most cancers. Uh and we could talk
about that for some I mean there the
example most people use in terms of
choosing a correct therapy is her
septin. So there's a marker for the
particular cancer called her two. That's
herptin works on breast cancer that is
what we call her two positive has that
marker. So people who are not her two
positive shouldn't get her septin. it's
not going to necessarily help. So, so
that's so we're getting there. That's
kind of the promise of a lot of this
stuff coming along, a lot of the
research, but it's but you know, I'm
careful not to overpromise that we've
done it for everything. We're getting
there a little bit tiny tiny little like
there's there's a KAS which is it's
called KAS is a little piece of DNA and
in in bowel cancer it tells you when the
chemo is not going to work. Now that
that's not very sexy. It's not very
wonderful to say. Yes, we can definitely
tell you that treatment is not going to
work. But actually, it does help a bit
because it it saves people from having
unnecessary toxicity from treatment. One
day, and I think Deborah is absolutely
right, one day we will have a predictive
test of these particular cancer cells.
What is likely to happen in your
particular case? not breast cancer, not
prostate cancer, but in your particular
case, should you have therapy or should
you not? If if it is going to benefit,
then maybe it's more justifiable to have
a horrible toxicity. Um, and if if it
isn't, then absolutely not do it.
Prediction is, I think, going to be the
name of the game. You you all seem to be
roughly on the same page of many of the
issues related to the topic that we're
discussing here tonight. However, I
wonder if I can find a bit of space
among you when it comes
to the following. The preponderance of
cases of cancer happen because you're
born with it. It's in your It's in your
genetic makeup. Or the preponderance of
cases of cancer happen because of what
we're doing to our environment. Deborah,
go. Well, we know from studies of
identical twins that start from one egg
split in two at birth that identical
twins look quite similar genetically in
terms of their chromosomal bands at age
three and by age 50 they don't even look
related to one another. That's telling
us that basically for most cancers genes
give us the gun. The environment pulls
the trigger. The National Cancer
Institute has reported that for breast
cancer, one in 10 or fewer cases occurs
in a woman who has inherited a risk from
her mother or father. But all cancer
comes about when your genes stop doing
their job. As Sid says, our healthy
genes go out of whack and we end up with
cancer as a result. That happens as a
result of what happens to you after
you're born, not before. Sid, I agree. I
mean, you know, as I said, this this
idea of of a gun and the trigger analogy
is kind of helpful because you need
both. Um, you can imagine situations
where, you know, there are certainly
familiar forms of cancer in which the
cancer is is passed down from in the
family, but they tend to be more rare.
They tend to be, you know, there's some
common ones. Breast cancer, there's a
certainly examples of that. Um, so it's
it's a combination. Cancer by its very
nature if you look at the very
pathophysiology of cancer by its very
nature it's a combination of genes in
the environment both of them are
co-actors in the creation of cancer so
you couldn't say there was a propundance
of one versus the other it depends on
which cancer we're talking about so for
instance where you have u you know in
cases for instance breast cancer uh we
now know I mean I'll give you one good
example we now know in breast cancer the
use of exogenous hormones is a clear
co-actor um and you know in some
exogenous hormones hormones like hormone
replacement therapy like excess estrogen
contributes to it contributes to it. We
know it's very clear the epidemiological
data is quite clear about that. So in
that case now again it's it's an it's an
artificially created environment but
it's an environment. It's the
environment that you put into your own
body in the in the case of we or
actually I would say physicians put into
women's bodies. Um and so that's very
clear. On the flip side, we know we
don't understand, for instance, why a
child will suddenly get acute
lymphablastic leukemia while his twin
identical twin doesn't get the same kind
of leukemia. And it's a child. So, the
amount of environmental exposure might
be there, but it's certainly much less
than the kind of exposure you get from,
you know, having a pill of estrogen
every day. You slipped it in again. You
tried to say cancer as if it was one
disease. I mean, very, very important
point. Your question is unanswerable um
in terms of uh genetics versus
environment because cancer is not a
single disease. Cancer is analogy like a
traffic j if I use the plural cancers.
Cancers. Yes. Okay. Can you help me
then? Yes. Which cancers are you talking
about?
No. I mean some cancers are clearly
environmental in the sense that if you
smoke um you you have a higher chance of
getting lung cancers, cancer, flora,
mouth cancer, bladder and so on.
And if you don't, you won't. So I mean
always there's a balance and and even
our not everybody with genetic
abnormality is for breast cancer is
going to get breast cancer. So always
there is a balance a seessaw between
genetics and uh exogenous environmental
influences. It depends on the cancer and
it depends on the particular population
that you're looking at. And one thing
that's important is let me share
something with you that comes from
Israel that I don't know what to do
with. I've been working with colleagues
there on this for about 10 years. We are
seeing the following pattern in patients
in uh in Hadasa Medical Center in
Jerusalem. We are seeing that mothers
are being diagnosed after their
daughters with BRCA1 related breast
cancer. That is a genetic mutation BRCA1
that increases the risk of breast cancer
is showing up in the daughters in their
30s and then showing up late in the
mothers in their late 60s. So there's
something going on here. What do you
think mutation? I obviously I believe
it's an environmental factor or factors
because it's not going to be one thing
in the environment. We know that just as
there is not one cancer. There's not one
environment. It's nutrition. It's
lifestyle. It's where you live, where
you work, what you eat, what you do, and
whether or not nowadays you put the cell
phone in your bra. All of those things
will have an effect. And we're seeing
this pattern that's really hard to
explain. Why are daughters getting
diagnosed and then they go back and find
the mutation in the mother? Okay, so we
don't know. Well, one one thing that
that's important and this is one of the
reasons that we should be spending more
money particularly on finding these
environmental carcinogens is they have
to be you have to be you have to be
specific about the carcinogen. You can't
say well the water is causing cancer.
You can't say the air is causing cancer
because that statement begins to lack
sense. You know, you can't you can't not
drink the water. You can't not breathe
the air. So they have to be removable,
identifiable carcinogens which can be
modifiable, behaviorally modifiable for
instance would be very good like tobacco
again a good example. Um so but you know
that's one of the questions I have for
you Sid is that we don't live in a
bubble and because we can't do that kind
of research on living people. It's
unethical. We would agree. How can we be
smarter about using experimental data
where we have it? You talk about the
development of therapies beautifully in
your writing. But where are we now with
understanding environmental causes of
cancer beside waiting for dead bodies to
mount? That's my that is my argument
with some of your work. Let's get him to
respond. Well, there are two responses.
Number one is the idea again that
there's a dichotomy between prevention
and treatment and genetics. I think is
somewhat was certainly true in the 1970s
and 1980s. That's not true anymore. So,
in fact, much of what we're learning
about how to treat or even understand
cancers. For instance, you know, the
understanding of BRCA1 ultimately
backtracks into understanding therefore
into how environment causes BRCA1 breast
cancer in a woman who carries that gene.
So the the the the dichotomy is it
doesn't exist anymore. In fact, let me
give you one more example. Tmoxifen was
a medicine that was originally invented
to treat metastatic breast cancer in
women. Well, guess what? It has a
powerful effect in preventing breast
cancer in women who don't have have
never had breast cancer. So again,
here's a medicine that was invented
entirely to treat breast cancer, but if
you use it appropriately in appropriate
kinds of contexts, you can use it to
actually prevent breast cancer. So I
think these two these two silos have
finally thankfully begun to communicate
with each other and I hope this
communication continues. Okay, let me
get Allison in on this then. Um on
genomics, how successful have advances
in genomics been in treating cancer? So
I think they're just starting, right?
Right. So herptin is an example of
perfect example of an advance in
genomics that worked and so they were
able to do that. The big studies now and
it's interesting going back to to
something that was said earlier about
you've got to be careful not to talk
about it as a too diverse disease. So
one of the questions that was just asked
was about um how do you pass out this
information? How do you figure it out?
And one of the ways you need to do is
these very large cohort studies which
take a huge amount of information and
you're not just taking their genetic
information. You're taking everything
else as well because we want to know
perhaps there's a common link perhaps
with the daughters versus the mothers
and definitely the environment they've
grown up in is different than the
mothers. And so we want to look at those
kind of things and and people really
need to understand that genomics is not
the study of just the genes but it's
this interaction of genes with other
genes. So other the environment within
the cell as well as the full environment
outside the cell. So we so I would say
if you look there's some really big
studies going on right now. Just to talk
about a couple of Ontario ones there's
the we're involved in the international
consortium where they're trying to type
50 different cancers as many patients as
they can involved in that to try and
kind of pass out exactly what's going on
here. And another one is the uh project
where they're looking it's called the 1
millimeter challenge because what one of
the things that genomics potentially
could help us with is finding cancer
before it's big enough that we can see
it physically or those kinds of things.
And so that's hugely important because
that goes to prevention that goes to
living with it because you catch it
early enough. Let me go to Rob on
something that's in his field using HIV
to kill cancer cells. Oh
yes, it's that's called honor honorable
president. There have been several
different viruses that have actually
been used to actually um basically
target the cancer cell.
I those are very important things. I
unfortunately they're not going to be
widespread and it's very very unlikely
that will make a huge difference to to
the cancers. it may make uh certain
differences to certain cancers in
certain circumstances and for example I
think the earlier studies were in the
nasoparangal cancers yes but that's not
the big picture that's the small picture
small picture Sid glevec a drug that you
talk about in your book what is it what
does it do well glec is really an
exemplar more than anything else and the
you know for a long time the fantasy of
cancer therapy um was could you find a
medicine that would specifically kill
cancer cells while sparing normal cells
and they were few they were rare and
there were a few now what's interesting
is uh they were typically found
serendipitously they were typically
found through a combination you know you
would go to a plant extract for instance
and try to find that medicine now glevec
is an exemplar of a medicine that was
synthesized using the biology of the
cancer from step up so in other words
you began with understanding with
decoding that particular cancer so it
happened to affect glec happens to
affect a gene that is only present or
primarily present in in a this leukemia
chronic malogous leukemia. And so
Gleevec is a kind of medicine that only
will kill those leukemia cells and will
spare every cell in the body. And this
is a remarkable kind of you know it's a
chemically speaking it's a remarkable
chemical. How many successful clinical
trials have you had of that? Well you
know what's nice is you know as as one
as you know as as a professor of mine
used to say you don't need a you you
don't need too many good clinical trials
for aspirin. When the medicine works you
know it works. Um and and you know
that's one of the problems in cancer
place goes back to what Bob Buckman was
saying you know you know there's this me
tooism glevec doesn't need me tooism you
don't need to have a me tooism you know
the dose when it works it works because
the you know patients come out and you
know it from the third patient who was
treated but I thought I read in your
book that it's been tried in four
different cases and the results were
mixed and therefore you don't know that
it works yet all the time glec no gbec
in for chronic myogynous leukemia it has
now become standard of care it is it is
now indisputably true that although you
know about even even up to 10 years ago
we were comparing Gleevec with other
forms of therapy like transplantation
not true anymore patients with chronic
myogist leukemia are now uniformly
except for one occasion exception here
or there given bleedback okay deer do
you see a future where we're going to
shift focus from the massive effort uh
behind finding causes especially
environmental to eradicating the causes
I wonder if we're going to get to get to
a society where we're actually more
concerned about cleaning up the
pollution in the air and therefore
stopping the cancer before it act the
cancers excuse me before they have a
chance to happen.
Well, actually in an interesting way,
China may be setting the stage for some
of this because the Chinese are dealing
with massive epidemics of cancerous
valleys and rivers where they have
incredibly high rates of cancer and they
know very well it's because of their
prlegate use of industrial chemicals
where they have levels of exposure to
benzene and many things banned in the
United States and Canada that have been
used in in China and they're seeing a
horrible impact because of it. The
Chinese government has actually taken
steps to clean things up because it's
that bad and it's I think it's going to
set the stage for rethinking a lot of
the way that we deal with the
environment generally. Now, having said
that, having survived uh losing um both
of my parents to to cancer, I fully
understand and want and support the need
for research to improve treatment and
finding of cancer. We have to do that.
But think of it like this. If you had a
cliff with a a with people driving off
of it routinely, wouldn't it make sense
to put a barrier on that cliff rather
than to improve your ability to rescue
them with an ambulance every time they
fell off? That's kind of where we are
right now. We've gotten much better at
rescuing people who fall over the cliff
in certain types of cancer, not all.
Certainly not in brain cancer, but we
would be much better off if we could
stop people from falling off altogether
by preventing them from getting to that
stage. And that's why I'm focusing some
of my attention now on what the World
Health Organization has declared is a
possible cause of cancer in humans, cell
phone radiation, because we don't know
for sure what it's doing to people yet,
but we have very good compelling
evidence that it is increasing your risk
of a whole bunch of things. And I think
we have to pay more attention to the
environment. And if you look at funding
at Health Canada now, for Environment
Canada, for the United States EPA, which
is under attack for existing by some
part political parties right now, we are
at an all-time low of monitoring for the
environment, providing worker
protection, and providing environmental
regulation protection. My gosh, they're
talking about doing away with the Clean
Water Act. I mean, think about what that
would mean in the United States and
Canada. We had no controls on such
things. We got people here who want to
get in on that as well. Alison, then I I
have to say actually I totally agree and
in fact I was at a high school today and
I did a couple of high schools last last
week and the title of the talk is human
health is not all about humans. And so
the title is and it's about genomics and
it's about the genomics work being done
in cleaning up the environment in
providing food all of those kinds of
things increasing nutritional value. And
so so absolutely we need to look at
those two things and and none of these
things cancer or cancers or many of the
other diseases live in a vacuum. We
don't live in a vacuum. Um I I I would
be worried about overpromising how well
we're going to do with some of those
environmental influences. Um we've had
not a great success in society with the
exception perhaps of smoking although
still not completely of really advancing
and changing people's lifestyles. We
talk about healthy eating. We talk about
nutrition. We still certainly at the
moment currently fall off the bandwagon
all the time. Rob, I all I want to argue
with Deborah just a slight caveat. There
are it's not a barrier in front of the
cliff. It's many barriers. It's many
roads to the edge of the cliff. I I'm
making this point quite seriously. I
mean, some people drive off the cliff
because they want to. It's suicide.
Maybe the best way of stopping a suicide
is not actually a barrier, but actually
counseling or whatever. You know, I'm
just making the point that even though
that that we see the end product, which
is cancer, there are there are many many
different disease. There are many roads
to the that particular edge of that
cliff. And I just want to make the point
that we're not being negligent in not
paying attention to the barrier. We're
just looking. Sid, stand by. I've got
about a minute and change to go here. I
want to read you a question that you ask
in the book and then I want you to
answer it. In the end, you write, "Every
biography must also confront the death
of its subject. Is the end of cancer
conceivable in the future? Is it
possible to eradicate this disease from
our bodies and our societies forever?
What do you think? Well, I answer the
question in the negative in this book.
Um I think that it's unlikely that we
will um ever eradicate this family of
illnesses um from our bodies and
societies. uh we I hope we can reduce
the risk uh we can reduce the rates of
many forms of cancer by using a
combination of uh environmental
interventions uh by using and treatments
and prevention and screening uh and
again it varies from cancer to cancer
but ultimately as I said before one of
the most chilling things about the
fundamental biology of cancer is that
the very genes that allow our embryos to
grow our bodies to grow our brains to
grow if you change those genes if you
mutate those genes you unleash cancer.
I'll give you one quick example. There
is a society um which has been now quite
intensely studied which is relatively
cancer-free and that society was is
created by a founder mutation a change
in the gene that makes them cancer
resistant. Guess what gene that is? It's
a gene that fundamentally controls
growth. This is a society of dwarves um
in in South America. So uh so in other
words the link between growth as we
understand it the normal I'm using that
word in the context of of statistically
normal I don't mean that if you're
shorter in height you're not normal you
just differ from the statistical the
very drivers of growth that allow us to
attain our body size are their flip side
in some sense is cancer I want to thank
all of you for participating in what has
been I think a very fascinating hour uh
much appreciated to Deborah Davis on the
line from the environmental health trust
in Pittsburgh Pennsylvania as always
you're going to hold up your phone
there. That's her cell phone, folks.
That's her cell phone. She's hooked it
up to her Blackberry. How about that?
Okay, thank you for that, Deborah Davis.
Back here in the studio, Allison Simson
from the Ontario Genomics Institute,
Robert Buckman from PMH, Princess
Margaret Hospital, and Sedartha
Mukerjee, author of The Emperor of All
Maladies. Thanks so much, everybody.
Thank you. Pleasure.
Thank you.